itation Nr: 21020102
Decision Date: 04/06/21	Archive Date: 04/06/21

DOCKET NO. 16-10 491
DATE:  April 6, 2021

ORDER

Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for a depressive disorder and a schizoid personality disorder from September 19, 2019 is denied.

Entitlement to a total disability rating based on individual unemployability due to a service-connected disability (TDIU) is denied.

FINDINGS OF FACT

1. During the period herein on appeal, the Veteran’s depressive disorder and schizoid personality disorder have resulted in occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, but not in total occupational and social impairment.

2. The Veteran’s service-connected disability does not preclude him from securing or following a substantially gainful occupation.

CONCLUSIONS OF LAW

1. The criteria for a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for depressive disorder and schizoid personality disorder have not been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.7, 4.10, 4.21, 4.125, 4.126, 4.130, Diagnostic Code (DC) 9434.

2. The criteria for TDIU have not all been met. 38 U.S.C. §§ 1155, 5107; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.340, 3.341, 4.15, 4.16. 

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The Veteran served on active duty from July 1988 to January 1995.

This case is before the Board of Veterans’ Appeals (Board) on appeal from an October 2014 Regional Office (RO) rating decision. 

In September 2018, the Board remanded the case for further development. In February 2020, the Board granted an initial rating of 70 percent for a depressive disorder and a schizoid personality disorder prior to September 19, 2019 and remanded the issue of a rating in excess of 70 percent from September 19, 2019 as well as entitlement to a TDIU for further development.

Increased Rating

Disability ratings are determined by applying the criteria set forth in VA’s Schedule for Rating Disabilities, which is based on the average impairment of earning capacity. Individual disabilities are assigned separate DCs. 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. § 4.1. The basis of a disability evaluation is the ability of the body as a whole, or of the psyche, or of a system or organ of the body to function under the ordinary conditions of daily life including employment. 38 C.F.R. § 4.10.

In determining the severity of a disability, the Board is required to consider the potential application of various other provisions of the regulations governing VA benefits, whether or not they were raised by the Veteran, as well as the entire history of the Veteran’s disability. 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.1, 4.2; Schafrath v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 589, 595 (1991).

If the disability more closely approximates the criteria for the higher of two ratings, the higher rating will be assigned; otherwise, the lower rating is assigned. 38 C.F.R. § 4.7. It is not expected that all cases will show all the findings specified; however, findings sufficiently characteristic to identify the disease and the disability therefrom and coordination of rating with impairment of function will be expected in all instances. 38 C.F.R. § 4.21.

In deciding this appeal, the Board has considered whether separate ratings for different periods of time are warranted, a practice of assigning ratings referred to as “staging the ratings.” See Fenderson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 119 (1999).

1. Entitlement to a disability rating in excess of 70 percent for a depressive disorder and a schizoid personality disorder from September 19, 2019

The Veteran contends that his depressive disorder and schizoid personality disorder warrant a disability rating higher than currently assigned. The Veteran’s service-connected disorder is currently rated as 70 percent disabling as of July 16, 2013 under DC 9434.

Under 38 C.F.R. § 4.130, DC 9434, a 70 percent evaluation is warranted where there is occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas, such as work, school, family relations, judgment, thinking, or mood, due to such symptoms as: suicidal ideation; obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities; speech intermittently illogical, obscure, or irrelevant; near-continuous panic or depression affecting the ability to function independently, appropriately and effectively; impaired impulse control (such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence); spatial disorientation; neglect of personal appearance and hygiene; difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances (including work or a work like setting); and inability to establish and maintain effective relationships. Id.

A 100 percent evaluation requires total occupational and social impairment, due to such symptoms as: gross impairment in thought processes or communication; persistent delusions or hallucinations; grossly inappropriate behavior; persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living (including maintenance of minimal personal hygiene); disorientation to time or place; and memory loss for names of close relatives, own occupation, or own name. Id.

Ratings are assigned according to the manifestation of particular symptoms. However, the use of the term “such as” in 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 demonstrates that the symptoms after that phrase are not intended to constitute an exhaustive list, but rather are to serve as examples of the type and degree of the symptoms, or their effects, that would justify a particular rating. Mauerhan v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 436 (2002). A veteran may only qualify for a given disability rating under § 4.130 by demonstrating the particular symptoms associated with that percentage or others of similar severity, frequency, and duration. Vazquez-Claudio v. Shinseki, 713 F.3d 112, 118 (Fed. Cir. 2013). Other language in Vazquez-Claudio indicates that the phrase “others of similar severity, frequency, and duration,” can be thought of as symptoms of like kind to those listed in the regulation for a given disability rating. Id. 116.

If the evidence demonstrates that the claimant’s psychiatric disorder produces symptoms and resulting occupational and social impairment equivalent to that set forth in the criteria for a given rating in the General Rating Formula, then the appropriate, equivalent rating will be assigned. Mauerhan, 16 Vet. App. at 443. In this regard, the Board must consider the frequency, severity, and duration of psychiatric symptoms, the length of remissions, and the veteran’s capacity for adjustment during periods of remission. 38 C.F.R. § 4.126. While VA considers the level of social impairment, it shall not assign an evaluation based solely on social impairment. Id. 

In a September 19, 2019 mental disorders disability benefits questionnaire (DBQ), the examiner provided diagnoses of major depressive disorder and panic disorder. The Veteran reported difficulty being close to people, chooses not to have friends, has not seen his family in 3 years, and spends time doing solitary activities but does not take pleasure in them. He reports not caring about praise or criticism because he does not care if others like him. He is emotionally distant from his wife, and his marriage is affected by his mood. He is not involved in any community activities and spends his time doing things around the house. The examiner noted the Veteran’s level of impairment as occupational and social impairment with deficiencies in most areas. 

The September 2019 examiner noted that the Veteran reported that he no longer has nightmares but has flashbacks, feels persistently irritable, and rarely experiences positive emotions. He reported anger outbursts, primarily verbal, and that his current wife has almost left him due to his anger. He reported that he has thought about suicide in the past, most recently within the past few months but not currently; he does not have specific plans but thought he could do it. The Veteran reports feeling depressed most days, rating his level of depression as an 8 out of 10, difficulty with concentration, hypervigilance, startles easily, sleep difficulties with early morning awakening, feels anxious and on edge continuously, and stays stressed. The examiner noted that the Veteran drove himself to his appointment, was casually dressed, hygiene and grooming were good, and posture, gait, and general motor behaviors were within normal limits. He was cooperative, fully oriented, thought content was within normal limits, he denied suicidal or homicidal ideation, audio/visual hallucinations, or ideas of reference/paranoia, and there was no evidence of delusions. Thought processes were logical, linear, and reality based, speech was within normal limits, his affect was full and appropriate, and his fund of knowledge, attention, memory, abstracting thinking, and judgment were good. The Veteran experiences symptoms including depressed mood, anxiety, chronic sleep impairment, flattened affect, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, suicidal ideation, impaired impulse control, such as unprovoked irritability with periods of violence, and panic attacks that occur weekly or less often. The examiner noted that his diagnosis changed from depression NOS to major depressive disorder, single episode, moderate, addition of panic disorder, and that the change in diagnosis suggests worsening of depression and a progression of symptoms of Schizoid personality disorder.

In the October 2019 mental disorders DBQ, the examiner provided diagnoses of unspecified depressive disorder and schizoid personality disorder. The examiner found that the Veteran has occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity, experiencing symptoms including depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, panic attacks that occur weekly or less often, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships, difficulty in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a worklike setting, suicidal ideation, and obsessional rituals which interfere with routine activities. The examiner noted that the Veteran was alert, pleasant, and cooperative, maintained adequate eye contact, and was casually dressed and appropriately groomed.

Private treatment records received in January 2020 include an October 23, 2019 initial psychiatric assessment indicating that the Veteran was currently married but that his issues affect his marriage as well as his ability to sustain friendships. The Veteran reported that he was currently employed but that he has had difficulties getting along with coworkers or management in the past, due to irritability and anger. He reported experiencing flashbacks and nightmares of service and that since his last appointment in October 2018, he is “pretty much the same. Nothing has really changed for [him] [it is] the same.” He stated that he feels more depressed and feels suicidal or has suicidal thoughts sometimes, noting that he thinks about it but does not think he would ever carry it out. The Veteran reported that work has become a big problem for him, and he does not want to be there or around his coworkers, stating that he works alone but sometimes feels that he cannot take it anymore. He knows that he has to be responsible and cannot leave work, or he will lose his job. The examiner noted that he experiences efforts to avoid thoughts, feelings, or conversations associated with trauma, activities, places, or people that arouse recollections of the trauma. He has inability to recall important aspect of the trauma, markedly diminished interest or participation in significant activities, feeling of detachment or estrangement from others, restricted range of affection, sense of a foreshortened future, difficulty falling or staying asleep, irritability or outbursts of anger, difficulty concentrating, hypervigilance, and exaggerated startle response. The Veteran’s symptoms include depressed mood, anxiety, suspiciousness, chronic sleep impairment, mild memory loss, flattened affect, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective social relationships. During the examination, the Veteran was alert and oriented, cooperative, was able to relate well, speech was normal, no aphasia or dysarthria, depressed mood, constricted affect, no delusions, and no flight of ideas or looseness of association. The Veteran denied auditory, visual, or tactile hallucinations, suicidal or homicidal thought or any self-injurious behavior. 

Per the February 2020 Board remand, the Veteran was afforded a new VA examination in October 2020. The examination report provides diagnoses of unspecified depressive disorder and schizoid personality disorder. The examiner noted occupational and social impairment with reduced reliability and productivity. The Veteran is employed, married, has contact with relatives once or twice a year, denied having friends or hobbies, and does yard work and helps with household chores. He drives but does not go to the grocery store, restaurants, or attend worship services. The Veteran experiences symptoms including depressed mood, chronic sleep impairment, disturbances of motivation and mood, and difficulty adapting to stressful circumstances. The Veteran was cooperative, fully oriented, his speech was normal, thought processes were linear and logical, there was no obvious concerns about his memory, and no sign of a thought disorder, delusions, or hallucinations. The examiner stated that the Veteran was vague about his symptoms and his statement that he has been depressed for most days for 25 years is unlikely, as that is an uncommon mental condition. The examiner stated that symptoms have not significantly worsened since his previous examination.

Based on the foregoing, the Board finds that the Veteran’s overall disability picture is manifested by symptoms which fall within the criteria for the assignment of a 70 percent rating. The evidence does not show that the Veteran has had gross impairment in thought processes or communication, grossly inappropriate behavior, persistent delusions or hallucinations, persistent danger of hurting self or others; intermittent inability to perform activities of daily living; disorientation to time or place; or memory loss such as contemplated under the 100 percent rating criteria. There have been no symptoms of like kind to those listed for the 100 percent rating. Thus, the extent of his impairment has not been shown by the competent medical evidence of record to be that required for a 100 percent rating at any time during the appeal period. In short, the Veteran’s overall disability picture is not manifested by total occupational and social impairment. Accordingly, the assignment of a 100 percent rating is not warranted.

As the preponderance of the evidence is against the claim for a rating in excess of 70 percent during the appeal period, the benefit-of-the-doubt doctrine is not applicable, and the claim must be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b); Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 55 (1990).

2. Entitlement to a TDIU

The Veteran contends that his service-connected depressive disorder and schizoid personality disorder, prevent him from seeking, gaining, and maintaining meaningful, gainful employment.

It was previously determined that the issue of entitlement to TDIU was raised by the record. See Rice v. Shinseki, 22 Vet. App. 447 (2009). In July 2020 correspondence, the RO provided the Veteran with an Application for Increased Compensation based on unemployability and requested that the Veteran return the completed form. As of the date of this decision, the Veteran has not returned the completed application.

A “schedular” TDIU may be assigned where the schedular rating is less than total if it is found that the disabled person is unable to secure or follow a substantially gainful occupation as a result of 1) a single service-connected disability ratable at 60 percent or more, or 2) as a result of two or more disabilities, provided at least one disability is ratable at 40 percent or more, and there is sufficient additional service-connected disability to bring the combined rating to 70 percent or more. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.34l, 4.16(a). Disabilities of one or both upper extremities, or one or both lower extremities, including the bilateral factor, disabilities resulting from a common etiology or a single accident, and disabilities affecting a single body system such as orthopedic disabilities, will be considered as one disability for TDIU purposes.

The Veteran has one service-connected disability, unspecified depressive disorder with schizoid personality traits evaluated as 70 percent disabling from July 16, 2013. The Veteran meets the schedular threshold percentage requirement.

It is the established policy of VA that all veterans who are unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation by reason of service-connected disabilities shall be rated totally disabled. Therefore, rating boards should submit to the Director of Compensation Service, for extra-schedular consideration all cases of veterans who are unemployable by reason of service-connected disabilities, but who fail to meet the percentage standards set forth in § 4.16. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(b). The rating board will include a full statement as to the veteran’s service-connected disabilities, employment history, educational and vocational attainment and all other factors having a bearing on the issue. Id. 

Entitlement to a TDIU requires the presence of impairment so severe that it is impossible for the average person to follow a substantially gainful occupation. See 38 U.S.C. § 1155; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.340, 3.341, 4.16. In determining the severity of impairment, the central inquiry is “whether the Veteran’s service-connected disabilities alone are of sufficient severity to produce unemployability.” Hatlestad v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 524, 529 (1993). Consideration may be given to the Veteran’s level of education, special training, and previous work experience, but not to his age or the impairment caused by non-service-connected disabilities. See 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.341, 4.16, 4.19.

Marginal employment shall not be considered substantially gainful employment for purposes of entitlement to TDIU. 38 C.F.R. § 4.16(a). Marginal employment generally shall be deemed to exist when a veteran’s earned annual income does not exceed the amount established by the U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, as the poverty threshold for one person. Id. Consideration shall be given in all claims to the nature of the employment and reason for termination. Id. 

After review of the evidentiary record, the Board finds that the functional limitations imposed by the Veteran’s service-connected disability do not render him unable to secure and follow a substantially gainful occupation. The evidence of record does not demonstrate that his service-connected disability precludes him from substantially gainful employment.

In the September 2019 DBQ, the examiner noted that after service, the Veteran worked at a prison for two years, and that since then he has worked for Goodyear for over 20 years, lately reporting problems with attendance and confrontations. He reported that he chose manual labor jobs because he felt it was too hard to concentrate when attempting to take college courses. The Veteran reported that he has taken days off just because he did not feel like working, has had confrontations due to petty arguments that turned to verbal fights, has been written up, and is on his last step prior to getting suspended from work.

In the October 2019 mental disorders DBQ, the Veteran reported that he continues to work in manufacturing. The examiner noted some difficulty in establishing and maintaining effective work and social relationships and in adapting to stressful circumstances, including work or a worklike setting.

Private treatment records include a January 15, 2020 record indicating that the Veteran reported that he is currently employed and has worked in manual labor for the same employer for 21 years. He graduated from high school and completed some college courses in human resources. The Veteran works alone but reported that work has become a big problem for him and has had difficulties getting along with coworkers or management in the past due to irritability and anger. 

In the October 2020 VA examination report, the Veteran reported that he is currently employed, 40 hours a week at a factory, for over 20 years. He said he does not receive performance reviews, and that in the past 12 months he has missed 8-9 days because he did not want to go in. The examiner noted that the Veteran has been gainfully employed at the same job for 22 years, and that it is usual for most people to sometimes not want to go to work. The examiner stated that his mental conditions have not significantly impacted his vocational functioning. 

The Board finds that while the Veteran’s service-connected depressive disorder with schizoid personality traits may have some negative effect on his employment, the record does not indicate that he has been unable to obtain or maintain substantially gainful employment due to his service-connected disability. In fact, the Veteran has successfully held his current position with the same employer for over 22 years.

The Veteran’s disability for which service connection has been established is depressive disorder with schizoid personality traits. By the assigned schedular rating, the Veteran has been compensated for the symptomatology associated with this service-connected disability. Thus, impairment of industrial capacity due to a service-connected disability has already been taken into consideration via the disability rating assigned. The evidence does not show that the Veteran is incapable of performing the physical and mental acts required by employment due solely to his service-connected disability. The Veteran has not submitted a TDIU application or any other evidence to indicate otherwise.

Based on a review of all of the evidence of record as to the extent of functional loss, the Board finds that the preponderance of evidence shows that the Veteran’s service-connected disability does not render him unable to engage in employment, consistent with his work experience and education level. The preponderance of the evidence is against this claim for entitlement to a TDIU. There is no reasonable doubt to be resolved, and the appeal must be denied. 38 U.S.C. § 5107(b), 38 C.F.R. § 3.102. 

 

 

Z. SAHRAIE

Acting Veterans Law Judge

Board of Veterans’ Appeals

Attorney for the Board	A. Labi, Associate Counsel

The Board’s decision in this case is binding only with respect to the instant matter decided. This decision is not precedential and does not establish VA policies or interpretations of general applicability. 38 C.F.R. § 20.1303. 
