The partner of Robert Fuller Jr., the 87-year-old man who was shot and killed while asleep in bed on Feb. 14 at the Cogir Potomac Senior Living facility, has filed a lawsuit against the facility and its operators as well as the man accused of the murder, according to a complaint filed Thursday by attorneys of the SBWD Law firm in Baltimore.
The plaintiff, Linda Buttrick, who lived with Fuller at the facility where they both were receiving care for Parkinson’s disease, alleges that Cogir “had full knowledge and appreciation of the danger posed by one of its employees [Marquise James] and with intent, negligence, gross negligence, and/or malice chose to ignore this danger with the most outrageous and insidious derelictions imaginable.”
Maurquise Emillo James, 22, of Baltimore, was arrested 10 days later on Feb. 24 after bullet casings found at the scene of the shooting of a Maryland State Police trooper were linked to the gun allegedly used to shoot Fuller. He is charged with one count of first-degree murder in connection with Fuller’s death. The charge carries a potential life sentence.

After the killing, Buttrick remained in her apartment with her daughter, who flew from Maine to stay with her, according to the complaint, despite it being a crime scene and without additional security or protection. James remained her medical technician and continued to work at the facility even after Buttrick identified him to police as a suspect, according to the complaint.
“Ms. Buttrick lived in a state of constant fear. Her body shook, her heart raced and she felt physically ill each time she found herself alone in her apartment with the man she had identified to police as her partner’s killer,” the complaint said.

The complaint outlines 15 causes of action against Cogir of Potomac, Cogir Senior Living USA and James, seeking damages totaling more than $1.1 million for the psychological and mental distress she has suffered from the killing of Fuller. “This action seeks to hold the Cogir Defendants accountable for the violations of Ms. Buttrick’s safety and dignity, and for the institutional disregard for resident welfare that made Mr. Fuller’s gruesome murder possible – for those acts which were both intentional and negligent,” the complaint states.

Cogir Senior Living USA did not respond to Bethesda Today’s phone call and email requests for comment on Friday afternoon.

On March 5, James was found to be competent to stand trial in the homicide case and will continue to be held without bond in the Montgomery County Correctional Facility in Boyds. On March 27, he will return to court for a preliminary hearing, according to digital court records.

Michael Stark, James’s attorney, did not immediately respond Saturday to Bethesda Today’s request for comment.

SBWD Law filed the suit on behalf of Buttrick, who, according to the complaint, lived in an attached apartment next to Fuller’s. Both spent $20,000 per month to live in the apartment and facility.

James was the medication technician for Buttrick and Fuller and, according to the complaint, Buttrick believes that James overmedicated her the night of Fuller’s death, as she did not wake from the sound of a gunshot. According to the complaint, for weeks and months before the killing, multiple Cogir of Potomac employees expressed concerns about James’ behavior, such as acting erratically, working while impaired, mishandling medications and sexually harassing other employees.

“This senseless killing was entirely preventable,” the suit stated. “The Cogir Defendants took zero corrective actions relative to the warnings; they failed to perform even the bare minimum of investigations.”

James’ mother, Shenise James-Dubose, also worked at the facility in a leadership role as senior director. The complaint alleged her “position of authority was used to suppress complaints about her son and reprimand employees” who reported his behaviors. No legal action was taken against her by Buttrick.

The complaint also alleged that Cogir allowed James to return to the facility after the killing and continue to administer medication to Buttrick despite her telling police she believed James was a suspect. Later, multiple employees recognized James as the suspect shown in surveillance footage shared by police on Feb. 20, the complaint said.

The surveillance footage captured at 5:05 a.m. on Feb. 14  shows a person wearing a mask opening an exterior door to the facility, a door that normally required a key. Prosecutors say James had tampered with the door about a month prior to the homicide and left it propped open with a paper towel.

During a bond review hearing for James in late February, Jodie Mount, an assistant state’s attorney for the Montgomery County State’s Attorney’s Office, described Fuller’s death as a “pre-planned, cold-blooded killing.”

The complaint also alleges that there were a “litany of security failings on the part of Cogir” that also led to Fuller’s killing. Days before James’ arrest, he was discovered by employees at the facility acting “erratically,” the complaint said, and when he left, the same door was found to be tampered with again.
