A Guide to the PROJECT

MANAGEMENT BODY OF

KNOWLEDGE

(PMBOK® GUIDE)

Sixth Edition

This book was printed utilizing a patented anti-counterfeit print technology designed to prevent

unauthorized reproductions. The paper color is gray instead of white. When the pages of the book are

copied or scanned a hidden warning message will appear in the background. This security feature is

intended to discourage anyone from attempting to illegally reproduce or counterfeit this book.


This book was printed utilizing a patented anti-counterfeit print technology designed to prevent
unauthorized reproductions. The paper color is gray instead of white. When the pages of the book are
copied or scanned a hidden warning message will appear in the background. This security feature is
intended to discourage anyone from attempting to illegally reproduce or counterfeit this book.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Names: Project Management Institute, publisher.

Title: A guide to the project management body of knowledge (PMBOK guide) / Project Management Institute.

Other titles: PMBOK guide

Description: Sixth edition. | Newtown Square, PA: Project Management Institute, 2017. | Series: PMBOK guide |

Includes bibliographical references and index.

Identifiers: LCCN 2017032505 (print) | LCCN 2017035597 (ebook) | ISBN 9781628253900 (ePUP) | ISBN

9781628253917 (kindle) | ISBN 9781628253924 ( Web PDF) | ISBN 9781628251845 (paperback)

Subjects: LCSH: Project management. | BISAC: BUSINESS & ECONOMICS / Project Management.

Classification: LCC HD69.P75 (ebook) | LCC HD69.P75 G845 2017 (print) | DDC 658.4/04--dc23

LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2017032505


ISBN: 978-1-62825-184-5

Published by:

Project Management Institute, Inc.

14 Campus Boulevard

Newtown Square, Pennsylvania 19073-3299 USA

Phone: +1 610-356-4600

Fax: +1 610-356-4647

Email: customercare@pmi.org

Website: www.PMI.org

©2017 Project Management Institute, Inc. All rights reserved.

Project Management Institute, Inc. content is copyright protected by U.S. intellectual property law that is recognized

by most countries. To republish or reproduce PMI's content, you must obtain our permission. Please go to

http://www.pmi.org/permissions for details.

To place a Trade Order or for pricing information, please contact Independent Publishers Group:

Independent Publishers Group

Order Department

814 North Franklin Street

Chicago, IL 60610 USA

Phone: +1 800-888-4741

Fax: +1 312- 337-5985

Email: orders@ipgbook.com (For orders only)

For all other inquiries, please contact the PMI Book Service Center.

PMI Book Service Center

P.O. Box 932683, Atlanta, GA 31193-2683 USA

Phone: 1-866-276-4764 (within the U.S. or Canada) or +1-770-280-4129 (globally)

Fax: +1-770-280-4113

Email: info@bookorders.pmi.org

Printed in the United States of America. No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any

means, electronic, manual, photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without prior

written permission of the publisher.

The paper used in this book complies with the Permanent Paper Standard issued by the National Information

Standards Organization (Z39.48—1984).

PMI, the PMI logo, PMBOK, OPM3, PMP, CAPM, PgMP, PfMP, PMI-RMP, PMI-SP, PMI-ACP, PMI-PBA,

PROJECT MANAGEMENT JOURNAL, PM NETWORK, PMI TODAY, PULSE OF THE PROFESSION and the slogan MAKING PROJECT MANAGEMENT INDISPENSABLE FOR BUSINESS RESULTS. are all marks of

Project Management Institute, Inc. For a comprehensive list of PMI trademarks, contact the PMI Legal Department.

All other trademarks, service marks, trade names, trade dress, product names and logos appearing herein are the

property of their respective owners. Any rights not expressly granted herein are reserved.

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

4

The Project Management Institute, Inc. (PMI) standards and guideline publications, of

which the document contained herein is one, are developed through a voluntary consensus

standards development process. This process brings together volunteers and/or seeks out

the views of persons who have an interest in the topic covered by this publication. While

PMI administers the process and establishes rules to promote fairness in the development of

consensus, it does not write the document and it does not independently test, evaluate, or

verify the accuracy or completeness of any information or the soundness of any judgments

contained in its standards and guideline publications.

PMI disclaims liability for any personal injury, property or other damages of any nature

whatsoever, whether special, indirect, consequential or compensatory, directly or indirectly

resulting from the publication, use of application, or reliance on this document. PMI

disclaims and makes no guaranty or warranty, expressed or implied, as to the accuracy or

completeness of any information published herein, and disclaims and makes no warranty

that the information in this document will fulfill any of your particular purposes or needs.

PMI does not undertake to guarantee the performance of any individual manufacturer or

seller's products or services by virtue of this standard or guide.

In publishing and making this document available, PMI is not undertaking to render

professional or other services for or on behalf of any person or entity, nor is PMI

undertaking to perform any duty owed by any person or entity to someone else. Anyone

using this document should rely on his or her own independent judgment or, as

appropriate, seek the advice of a competent professional in determining the exercise of

reasonable care in any given circumstances. Information and other standards on the topic

covered by this publication may be available from other sources, which the user may wish

to consult for additional views or information not covered by this publication.

PMI has no power, nor does it undertake to police or enforce compliance with the

contents of this document. PMI does not certify, test, or inspect products, designs, or

installations for safety or health purposes. Any certification or other statement of

compliance with any health or safety-related information in this document shall not be

attributable to PMI and is solely the responsibility of the certifier or maker of the

statement.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

PART 1.

A GUIDE TO THE PROJECT MANAGEMENT BODY OF

KNOWLEDGE (PMBOK® Guide)

1. INTRODUCTION

1.1 Overview and Purpose of this Guide

1.1.1 The Standard for Project Management

1.1.2 Common Vocabulary

1.1.3 Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct

1.2 Foundational Elements

1.2.1 Projects

1.2.2 The Importance of Project Management

1.2.3 Relationship of Project, Program, Portfolio, and Operations

Management

1.2.4 Components of the Guide

1.2.5 Tailoring

1.2.6 Project Management Business Documents

2. THE ENVIRONMENT IN WHICH PROJECTS OPERATE

2.1 Overview

2.2 Enterprise Environmental Factors

2.2.1 EEFs Internal to the Organization

2.2.2 EEFs External to the Organization

2.3 Organizational Process Assets

2.3.1 Processes, Policies, and Procedures

2.3.2 Organizational Knowledge Repositories

2.4 Organizational Systems

2.4.1 Overview

2.4.2 Organizational Governance Frameworks 3. THE ROLE OF THE PROJECT MANAGER

3.1 Overview

3.2 Definition of a Project Manager

3.3 The Project Manager's Sphere of Influence

3.3.1 Overview

3.3.2 The Project

3.3.3 The Organization

3.3.4 The Industry

3.3.5 Professional Discipline

3.3.6 Across Disciplines

3.4 Project Manager Competences

3.4.1 Overview

3.4.2 Technical Project Management Skills

3.4.3 Strategic and Business Management Skills

3.4.4 Leadership Skills

3.4.5 Comparison of Leadership and Management

3.5 Performing Integration

3.5.1 Performing Integration at the Process Level

3.5.2 Integration at the Cognitive Level

3.5.3 Integration at the Context Level

3.5.4 Integration and Complexity

4. PROJECT INTEGRATION MANAGEMENT

4.1 Develop Project Charter

4.1.1 Develop Project Charter: Inputs

4.1.2 Develop Project Charter: Tools and Techniques

4.1.3 Develop Project Charter: Outputs

4.2 Develop Project Management Plan

4.2.1 Develop Project Management Plan: Inputs

4.2.2 Develop Project Management Plan: Tools and Techniques

4.2.3 Develop Project Management Plan: Outputs

4.3 Direct and Manage Project Work

4.3.1 Direct and Manage Project Work: Inputs

4.3.2 Direct and Manage Project Work: Tools and Techniques

4.3.3 Direct and Manage Project Work: Outputs

7 4.4 Manage Project Knowledge

4.4.1 Manage Project Knowledge: Inputs

4.4.2 Manage Project Knowledge: Tools and Techniques

4.4.3 Manage Project Knowledge: Outputs

4.5 Monitor and Control Project Work

4.5.1 Monitor and Control Project Work: Inputs

4.5.2 Monitor and Control Project Work: Tools and Techniques

4.5.3 Monitor and Control Project Work: Outputs

4.6 Perform Integrated Change Control

4.6.1 Perform Integrated Change Control: Inputs

4.6.2 Perform Integrated Change Control: Tools and Techniques

4.6.3 Perform Integrated Change Control: Outputs

4.7 Close Project or Phase

4.7.1 Close Project or Phase: Inputs

4.7.2 Close Project or Phase: Tools and Techniques

4.7.3 Close Project or Phase: Outputs

5. PROJECT SCOPE MANAGEMENT

5.1 Plan Scope Management

5.1.1 Plan Scope Management: Inputs

5.1.2 Plan Scope Management: Tools and Techniques

5.1.3 Plan Scope Management: Outputs

5.2 Collect Requirements

5.2.1 Collect Requirements: Inputs

5.2.2 Collect Requirements: Tools and Techniques

5.2.3 Collect Requirements: Outputs

5.3 Define Scope

5.3.1 Define Scope: Inputs

5.3.2 Define Scope: Tools and Techniques

5.3.3 Define Scope: Outputs

5.4 Create WBS

5.4.1 Create WBS: Inputs

5.4.2 Create WBS: Tools and Techniques

5.4.3 Create WBS: Outputs

5.5 Validate Scope

5.12.1 Project Management Plan Components

5.12.2 Project Documents Examples

5.12.3 Project Management Plan Updates

5.12.4 Project Documents Updates

6. CLOSING PROCESS GROUP

6.1 Close Project or Phase

6.1.1 Project Management Plan Components

6.1.2 Project Documents Examples

6.1.3 Project Documents Updates

PART 3.

APPENDICES, GLOSSARY, AND INDEX

APPENDIX X1

SIXTH EDITION CHANGES

APPENDIX X2

CONTRIBUTORS AND REVIEWERS OF THE PMBOK® GUIDE—

SIXTH EDITION

APPENDIX X3

AGILE, ITERATIVE, ADAPTIVE, AND HYBRID PROJECT

ENVIRONMENTS

APPENDIX X4

SUMMARY OF KEY CONCEPTS FOR KNOWLEDGE AREAS

APPENDIX X5

SUMMARY OF TAILORING CONSIDERATIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE

AREAS

APPENDIX X6

TOOLS AND TECHNIQUES

GLOSSARY

20

INTRODUCTION

1.1 OVERVIEW AND PURPOSE OF THIS GUIDE

Project management is not new. It has been in use for hundreds of years. Examples of

project outcomes include:

Pyramids of Giza,

Olympic games,

Great Wall of China,

Taj Mahal,

Publication of a children's book,

Panama Canal,

Development of commercial jet airplanes,

Polio vaccine,

Human beings landing on the moon,

Commercial software applications,

Portable devices to use the global positioning system (GPS), and

Placement of the International Space Station into Earth's orbit.

The outcomes of these projects were the result of leaders and managers applying project

management practices, principles, processes, tools, and techniques to their work. The

managers of these projects used a set of key skills and applied knowledge to satisfy their

customers and other people involved in and affected by the project. By the mid-20th

century, project managers began the work of seeking recognition for project management as

a profession. One aspect of this work involved obtaining agreement on the content of the

body of knowledge (BOK) called project management. This BOK became known as the

Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK). The Project Management Institute

(PMI) produced a baseline of charts and glossaries for the PMBOK. Project managers soon

realized that no single book could contain the entire PMBOK. Therefore, PMI developed PMI defines the project management body of knowledge (PMBOK) as a term that

describes the knowledge within the profession of project management. The project

management body of knowledge includes proven traditional practices that are widely

applied as well as innovative practices that are emerging in the profession.

The body of knowledge (BOK) includes both published and unpublished materials.

This body of knowledge is constantly evolving. This PMBOK® Guide identifies a subset of

the project management body of knowledge that is generally recognized as good practice.

Generally recognized means the knowledge and practices described are

applicable to most projects most of the time, and there is consensus about their

value and usefulness.

Good practice means there is general agreement that the application of the

knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques to project management processes can

enhance the chance of success over many projects in delivering the expected

business values and results.

The project manager works with the project team and other stakeholders to determine

and use the appropriate generally recognized good practices for each project. Determining

the appropriate combination of processes, inputs, tools, techniques, outputs and life cycle

phases to manage a project is referred to as “tailoring” the application of the knowledge

described in this guide.

This PMBOK® Guide is different from a methodology. A methodology is a system of

practices, techniques, procedures, and rules used by those who work in a discipline. This

PMBOK® Guide is a foundation upon which organizations can build methodologies,

policies, procedures, rules, tools and techniques, and life cycle phases needed to practice

project management.

1.1.1 THE STANDARD FOR PROJECT MANAGEMENT

This guide is based on The Standard for Project Management [1]. A standard is a

document established by an authority, custom, or general consent as a model or example.

As an American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standard, The Standard for Project

Management was developed using a process based on the concepts of consensus, openness,

due process, and balance. The Standard for Project Management is a foundational reference

for PMI's project management professional development programs and the practice of

project management. Because project management needs to be tailored to fit the needs of

the project, the standard and the guide are both based on descriptive practices, rather than

prescriptive practices. Therefore, the standard identifies the processes that are considered

good practices on most projects, most of the time. The standard also identifies the inputs

and outputs that are usually associated with those processes. The standard does not require

that any particular process or practice be performed. The Standard for Project Management

is included as Part II of A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK®

34 Guide).

The PMBOK® Guide provides more detail about key concepts, emerging trends,

considerations for tailoring the project management processes, and information on how

tools and techniques are applied to projects. Project managers may use one or more

methodologies to implement the project management processes outlined in the standard.

The scope of this guide is limited to the discipline of project management, rather than

the full spectrum of portfolios, programs, and projects. Portfolios and programs will be

addressed only to the degree they interact with projects. PMI publishes two other standards

that address the management of portfolios and programs:

The Standard for Portfolio Management [2], and

The Standard for Program Management [3].

1.1.2 COMMON VOCABULARY

A common vocabulary is an essential element of a professional discipline. The PMI

Lexicon of Project Management Terms [4] provides the foundational professional vocabulary

that can be consistently used by organizations, portfolio, program, and project managers

and other project stakeholders. The Lexicon will continue to evolve over time. The glossary

to this guide includes the vocabulary in the Lexicon along with additional definitions. There

may be other industry-specific terms used in projects that are defined by that industry's

literature.

1.1.3 CODE OF ETHICS AND PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT

PMI publishes the Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct [5] to instill confidence in the

project management profession and to help an individual in making wise decisions,

particularly when faced with difficult situations where the individual may be asked to

compromise his or her integrity or values. The values that the global project management

community defined as most important were responsibility, respect, fairness, and honesty.

The Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct affirms these four values as its foundation.

The Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct includes both aspirational standards and

mandatory standards. The aspirational standards describe the conduct that practitioners,

who are also PMI members, certification holders, or volunteers, strive to uphold. Although

adherence to the aspirational standards is not easily measured, conduct in accordance with

these is an expectation for those who consider themselves to be professionals—it is not

optional. The mandatory standards establish firm requirements and, in some cases, limit or

prohibit practitioner behavior. Practitioners who are also PMI members, certification

holders, or volunteers and who do not conduct themselves in accordance with these

standards will be subject to disciplinary procedures before PMI's Ethics Review Committee.

35 1.2 FOUNDATIONAL ELEMENTS

This section describes foundational elements necessary for working in and

understanding the discipline of project management.

1.2.1 PROJECTS

A project is a temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique product, service, or

result.

Unique product, service, or result. Projects are undertaken to fulfill objectives

by producing deliverables. An objective is defined as an outcome toward which

work is to be directed, a strategic position to be attained, a purpose to be

achieved, a result to be obtained, a product to be produced, or a service to be

performed. A deliverable is defined as any unique and verifiable product, result,

or capability to perform a service that is required to be produced to complete a

process, phase, or project. Deliverables may be tangible or intangible.

Fulfillment of project objectives may produce one or more of the following

deliverables:

A unique product that can be either a component of another item, an

enhancement or correction to an item, or a new end item in itself (e.g., the

correction of a defect in an end item);

A unique service or a capability to perform a service (e.g., a business function

that supports production or distribution);

A unique result, such as an outcome or document (e.g., a research project that

develops knowledge that can be used to determine whether a trend exists or a

new process will benefit society); and

A unique combination of one or more products, services, or results (e.g., a

software application, its associated documentation, and help desk services).

Repetitive elements may be present in some project deliverables and activities. This

repetition does not change the fundamental and unique characteristics of the project

work. For example, office buildings can be constructed with the same or similar

materials and by the same or different teams. However, each building project remains

unique in key characteristics (e.g., location, design, environment, situation, people

involved).

Projects are undertaken at all organizational levels. A project can involve a single

individual or a group. A project can involve a single organizational unit or multiple

organizational units from multiple organizations.

Examples of projects include but are not limited to:

36 Developing a new pharmaceutical compound for market,

Expanding a tour guide service,

Merging two organizations,

Improving a business process within an organization,

Acquiring and installing a new computer hardware system for use in an

organization,

Exploring for oil in a region,

Modifying a computer software program used in an organization,

Conducting research to develop a new manufacturing process, and

Constructing a building.

Temporary endeavor. The temporary nature of projects indicates that a

project has a definite beginning and end. Temporary does not necessarily mean

a project has a short duration. The end of the project is reached when one or

more of the following is true:

The project's objectives have been achieved;

The objectives will not or cannot be met;

Funding is exhausted or no longer available for allocation to the project;

The need for the project no longer exists (e.g., the customer no longer wants

the project completed, a change in strategy or priority ends the project, the

organizational management provides direction to end the project);

The human or physical resources are no longer available; or

The project is terminated for legal cause or convenience.

Projects are temporary, but their deliverables may exist beyond the end of the project.

Projects may produce deliverables of a social, economic, material, or environmental

nature. For example, a project to build a national monument will create a deliverable

expected to last for centuries.

Projects drive change. Projects drive change in organizations. From a business

perspective, a project is aimed at moving an organization from one state to

another state in order to achieve a specific objective (see Figure 1-1). Before the

project begins, the organization is commonly referred to as being in the current

state. The desired result of the change driven by the project is described as the

future state.

For some projects, this may involve creating a transition state where multiple

steps are made along a continuum to achieve the future state. The successful

completion of a project results in the organization moving to the future state

37 and achieving the specific objective. For more information on project

management and change, see Managing Change in Organizations: A Practice

Guide [6].


Projects enable business value creation. PMI defines business value as the net

quantifiable benefit derived from a business endeavor. The benefit may be

tangible, intangible, or both. In business analysis, business value is considered

the return, in the form of elements such as time, money, goods, or intangibles

in return for something exchanged (see Business Analysis for Practitioners: A

Practice Guide, p. 185 [7]).

Business value in projects refers to the benefit that the results of a specific project

provide to its stakeholders. The benefit from projects may be tangible, intangible, or

both.

Examples of tangible elements include:

Monetary assets,

Stockholder equity,

Utility,

Fixtures,

Tools, and

Market share.

Examples of intangible elements include:

Goodwill,

Brand recognition,

Public benefit,

Trademarks,

Strategic alignment, and

Reputation.

Project Initiation Context. Organizational leaders initiate projects in response

to factors acting upon their organizations. There are four fundamental

categories for these factors, which illustrate the context of a project (see Figure

1-2):

Meet regulatory, legal, or social requirements;

Satisfy stakeholder requests or needs;

Implement or change business or technological strategies; and

Create, improve, or fix products, processes, or services.


1.2.2 THE IMPORTANCE OF PROJECT MANAGEMENT

Project management is the application of knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques to

project activities to meet the project requirements. Project management is accomplished

through the appropriate application and integration of the project management processes

identified for the project. Project management enables organizations to execute projects

effectively and efficiently.

Effective project management helps individuals, groups, and public and private

organizations to:

Meet business objectives;

Satisfy stakeholder expectations;

Be more predictable;

Increase chances of success;


Deliver the right products at the right time;

Resolve problems and issues;

Respond to risks in a timely manner;

Optimize the use of organizational resources;

Identify, recover, or terminate failing projects;

Manage constraints (e.g., scope, quality, schedule, costs, resources);

Balance the influence of constraints on the project (e.g., increased scope may

increase cost or schedule); and

Manage change in a better manner.

Poorly managed projects or the absence of project management may result in:

Missed deadlines,

Cost overruns,

Poor quality,

Rework,

Uncontrolled expansion of the project,

Loss of reputation for the organization,

Unsatisfied stakeholders, and

Failure in achieving the objectives for which the project was undertaken.

Projects are a key way to create value and benefits in organizations. In today's business

environment, organizational leaders need to be able to manage with tighter budgets, shorter

timelines, scarcity of resources, and rapidly changing technology. The business

environment is dynamic with an accelerating rate of change. To remain competitive in the

world economy, companies are embracing project management to consistently deliver

business value.

Effective and efficient project management should be considered a strategic competency

within organizations. It enables organizations to:

Tie project results to business goals,

Compete more effectively in their markets,

Sustain the organization, and

Respond to the impact of business environment changes on projects by

appropriately adjusting project management plans (see Section 4.2).

1.2.3 RELATIONSHIP OF PROJECT, PROGRAM, PORTFOLIO, AND OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT

1.2.3.1 OVERVIEW

Using project management processes, tools, and techniques puts in place a sound

foundation for organizations to achieve their goals and objectives. A project may be

managed in three separate scenarios: as a stand-alone project (outside of a portfolio or

program), within a program, or within a portfolio. Project managers interact with portfolio

and program managers when a project is within a program or portfolio. For example,

multiple projects may be needed to accomplish a set of goals and objectives for an

organization. In those situations, projects may be grouped together into a program. A

program is defined as a group of related projects, subsidiary programs, and program

activities managed in a coordinated manner to obtain benefits not available from managing

them individually. Programs are not large projects. A very large project may be referred to

as a megaproject. As a guideline, megaprojects cost US$1billion or more, affect 1 million or

more people, and run for years.

Some organizations may employ the use of a project portfolio to effectively manage

multiple programs and projects that are underway at any given time. A portfolio is defined

as projects, programs, subsidiary portfolios, and operations managed as a group to achieve

strategic objectives. Figure 1-3 illustrates an example of how portfolios, programs, projects,

and operations are related in a specific situation.

Program management and portfolio management differ from project management in

their life cycles, activities, objectives, focus, and benefits. However, portfolios, programs,

projects, and operations often engage with the same stakeholders and may need to use the

same resources (see Figure 1-3), which may result in a conflict in the organization. This

type of a situation increases the need for coordination within the organization through the

use of portfolio, program, and project management to achieve a workable balance in the

organization.

Figure 1-3 illustrates a sample portfolio structure indicating relationships between the

programs, projects, shared resources, and stakeholders. The portfolio components are

grouped together in order to facilitate the effective governance and management of the

work that helps to achieve organizational strategies and priorities. Organizational and

portfolio planning impact the components by means of prioritization based on risk,

funding, and other considerations. The portfolio view allows organizations to see how the

strategic goals are reflected in the portfolio. This portfolio view also enables the

implementation and coordination of appropriate portfolio, program, and project

governance. This coordinated governance allows authorized allocation of human, financial,

and physical resources based on expected performance and benefits.

42 Looking at project, program, and portfolio management from an organizational

perspective:

Program and project management focus on doing programs and projects the

“right” way; and

Portfolio management focuses on doing the “right” programs and projects.

Table 1-2 gives a comparative overview of portfolios, programs, and projects.

43 1.2.3.2 PROGRAM MANAGEMENT

Program management is defined as the application of knowledge, skills, and principles

to a program to achieve the program objectives and to obtain benefits and control not

available by managing program components individually. A program component refers to

projects and other programs within a program. Project management focuses on

interdependencies within a project to determine the optimal approach for managing the

project. Program management focuses on the interdependencies between projects and

between projects and the program level to determine the optimal approach for managing

them. Actions related to these program and project-level interdependencies may include:

Aligning with the organizational or strategic direction that affects program and

project goals and objectives;

Allocating the program scope into program components;

Managing interdependencies among the components of the program to best

serve the program;

Managing program risks that may impact multiple projects in the program;

44 Resolving constraints and conflicts that affect multiple projects within the

program;

Resolving issues between component projects and the program level;

Managing change requests within a shared governance framework;

Allocating budgets across multiple projects within the program; and

Assuring benefits realization from the program and component projects.

An example of a program is a new communications satellite system with projects for the

design and construction of the satellite and the ground stations, the launch of the satellite,

and the integration of the system.

For more information on program management, see The Standard for Program

Management [3].

1.2.3.3 PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT

A portfolio is defined as projects, programs, subsidiary portfolios, and operations

managed as a group to achieve strategic objectives.

Portfolio management is defined as the centralized management of one or more

portfolios to achieve strategic objectives. The programs or projects of the portfolio may not

necessarily be interdependent or directly related.

The aim of portfolio management is to:

Guide organizational investment decisions

Select the optimal mix of programs and projects to meet strategic objectives.

Provide decision-making transparency.

Prioritize team and physical resource allocation.

Increase the likelihood of realizing the desired return on investment.

Centralize the management of the aggregate risk profile of all components.

Portfolio management also confirms that the portfolio is consistent with and aligned

with organizational strategies.

Maximizing the value of the portfolio requires careful examination of the components

that comprise the portfolio. Components are prioritized so that those contributing the most

to the organization's strategic objectives have the required financial, team, and physical

resources.

For example, an infrastructure organization that has the strategic objective of

maximizing the return on its investments may put together a portfolio that includes a mix

of projects in oil and gas, power, water, roads, rail, and airports. From this mix, the

organization may choose to manage related projects as one portfolio. All of the power


projects may be grouped together as a power portfolio. Similarly, all of the water projects

may be grouped together as a water portfolio. However, when the organization has projects

in designing and constructing a power plant and then operates the power plant to generate

energy, those related projects can be grouped in one program. Thus, the power program

and similar water program become integral components of the portfolio of the

infrastructure organization.

For more information on portfolio management, see The Standard for Portfolio

Management [2].

1.2.3.4 OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT

Operations management is an area that is outside the scope of formal project

management as described in this guide.

Operations management is concerned with the ongoing production of goods and/or

services. It ensures that business operations continue efficiently by using the optimal

resources needed to meet customer demands. It is concerned with managing processes that

transform inputs (e.g., materials, components, energy, and labor) into outputs (e.g.,

products, goods, and/or services).

1.2.3.5 OPERATIONS AND PROJECT MANAGEMENT

Changes in business or organizational operations may be the focus of a project—

especially when there are substantial changes to business operations as a result of a new

product or service delivery. Ongoing operations are outside of the scope of a project;

however, there are intersecting points where the two areas cross.

Projects can intersect with operations at various points during the product life cycle,

such as;

When developing a new product, upgrading a product, or expanding outputs;

While improving operations or the product development process;

At the end of the product life cycle; and

At each closeout phase.

At each point, deliverables and knowledge are transferred between the project and

operations for implementation of the delivered work. This implementation occurs through

a transfer of project resources or knowledge to operations or through a transfer of

operational resources to the project.

1.2.3.6 ORGANIZATIONAL PROJECT MANAGEMENT (OPM) AND

STRATEGIES

Portfolios, programs, and projects are aligned with or driven by organizational strategies and differ in the way each contributes to the achievement of strategic goals:

Portfolio management aligns portfolios with organizational strategies by

selecting the right programs or projects, prioritizing the work, and providing

the needed resources.

Program management harmonizes its program components and controls

interdependencies in order to realize specified benefits.

Project management enables the achievement of organizational goals and

objectives.

Within portfolios or programs, projects are a means of achieving organizational goals

and objectives. This is often accomplished in the context of a strategic plan that is the

primary factor guiding investments in projects. Alignment with the organization's strategic

business goals can be achieved through the systematic management of portfolios, programs,

and projects through the application of organizational project management (OPM). OPM

is defined as a framework in which portfolio, program, and project management are

integrated with organizational enablers in order to achieve strategic objectives.

The purpose of OPM is to ensure that the organization undertakes the right projects

and allocates critical resources appropriately. OPM also helps to ensure that all levels in the

organization understand the strategic vision, the initiatives that support the vision, the

objectives, and the deliverables. Figure 1-4 shows the organizational environment where

strategy, portfolio, programs, projects, and operations interact.

For more information on OPM, refer to Implementing Organizational Project

Management: A Practice Guide [8].

47 1.2.4 COMPONENTS OF THE GUIDE

Projects comprise several key components that, when effectively managed, result in their

successful completion. This guide identifies and explains these components. The various

components interrelate to one another during the management of a project.

The key components are described briefly in Table 1-3. These components are more

fully explained in the sections that follow the table.

Table 1-3. Description of PMBOK® Guide Key Components

PMBOK® Guide Key Component Brief Description

Project life cycle (Section 1.2.4.1) The series of phases that a project passes through from its start to

its completion.

Project phase (Section 1.2.4.2) A collection of logically related project activities that culminates in

the completion of one or more deliverables.

Phase gate (Section 1.2.4.3) A review at the end of a phase in which a decision is made to

continue to the next phase, to continue with modification, or to

end a program or project.

Project management processes (Section

1.2.4.4)

A systematic series of activities directed toward causing an end

result where one or more inputs will be acted upon to create one

or more outputs.

Project Management Process Group

(Section 1.2.4.5)

A logical grouping of project management inputs, tools and

techniques, and outputs. The Project Management Process

Groups include Initiating, Planning, Executing, Monitoring and

Controlling, and Closing. Project Management Process Groups

are not project phases.

Project Management Knowledge Area

(Section 1.2.4.6)

An identified area of project management defined by its

knowledge requirements and described in terms of its component

processes, practices, inputs, outputs, tools, and techniques.

48

1.2.4.1 PROJECT AND DEVELOPMENT LIFE CYCLES

A project life cycle is the series of phases that a project passes through from its start to its

completion. It provides the basic framework for managing the project. This basic

framework applies regardless of the specific project work involved. The phases may be

sequential, iterative, or overlapping. All projects can be mapped to the generic life cycle

shown in Figure 1-5.

Project life cycles can be predictive or adaptive. Within a project life cycle, there are

generally one or more phases that are associated with the development of the product,

service, or result. These are called a development life cycle. Development life cycles can be

predictive, iterative, incremental, adaptive, or a hybrid model:

In a predictive life cycle, the project scope, time, and cost are determined in the

early phases of the life cycle. Any changes to the scope are carefully managed.

Predictive life cycles may also be referred to as waterfall life cycles.

In an iterative life cycle, the project scope is generally determined early in the project life cycle. 


but time and cost estimates are routinely modified as the

project team's understanding of the product increases. Iterations develop the

product through a series of repeated cycles, while increments successively add

to the functionality of the product.

In an incremental life cycle, the deliverable is produced through a series of

iterations that successively add functionality within a predetermined time

frame. The deliverable contains the necessary and sufficient capability to be

considered complete only after the final iteration.

Adaptive life cycles are agile, iterative, or incremental. The detailed scope is

defined and approved before the start of an iteration. Adaptive life cycles are

also referred to as agile or change-driven life cycles. See Appendix X3.

A hybrid life cycle is a combination of a predictive and an adaptive life cycle.

Those elements of the project that are well known or have fixed requirements

follow a predictive development life cycle, and those elements that are still

evolving follow an adaptive development life cycle.

It is up to the project management team to determine the best life cycle for each project.

The project life cycle needs to be flexible enough to deal with the variety of factors included

in the project. Life cycle flexibility may be accomplished by:

Identifying the process or processes needed to be performed in each phase,

Performing the process or processes identified in the appropriate phase,

Adjusting the various attributes of a phase (e.g., name, duration, exit criteria,

and entrance criteria).

Project life cycles are independent of product life cycles, which may be produced by a

project. A product life cycle is the series of phases that represent the evolution of a product,

from concept through delivery, growth, maturity, and to retirement.

1.2.4.2 PROJECT PHASE

A project phase is a collection of logically related project activities that culminates in the

completion of one or more deliverables. The phases in a life cycle can be described by a

variety of attributes. Attributes may be measurable and unique to a specific phase.

Attributes may include but are not limited to:

Name (e.g., Phase A, Phase B, Phase 1, Phase 2, proposal phase),

Number (e.g., three phases in the project, five phases in the project),

Duration (e.g., 1 week, 1 month, 1 quarter),

Resource requirements (e.g., people, buildings, equipment),

Entrance criteria for a project to move into that phase (e.g., specified approvals documented, specified documents completed), and

Exit criteria for a project to complete a phase (e.g., documented approvals,

completed documents, completed deliverables).

Projects may be separated into distinct phases or subcomponents. These phases or

subcomponents are generally given names that indicate the type of work done in that

phase. Examples of phase names include but are not limited to:

Concept development,

Feasibility study,

Customer requirements,

Solution development,

Design,

Prototype,

Build,

Test,

Transition,

Commissioning,

Milestone review, and

Lessons learned.

The project phases may be established based on various factors including, but not

limited to:

Management needs;

Nature of the project;

Unique characteristics of the organization, industry, or technology;

Project elements including, but not limited to, technology, engineering,

business, process, or legal; and

Decision points (e.g., funding, project go/no-go, and milestone review).

Using multiple phases may provide better insight to managing the project. It also

provides an opportunity to assess the project performance and take necessary corrective or

preventive actions in subsequent phases. A key component used with project phases is the

phase review (see Section 1.2.4.3).

1.2.4.3 PHASE GATE

A phase gate, is held at the end of a phase. The project's performance and progress are

compared to project and business documents including but not limited to:

51 Project business case (see Section 1.2.6.1),

Project charter (see Section 4.1),

Project management plan (see Section 4.2), and

Benefits management plan (see Section 1.2.6.2).

A decision (e.g., go/no-go decision) is made as a result of this comparison to:

Continue to the next phase,

Continue to the next phase with modification,

End the project,

Remain in the phase, or

Repeat the phase or elements of it.

Depending on the organization, industry, or type of work, phase gates may be referred

to by other terms such as, phase review, stage gate, kill point, and phase entrance or phase

exit. Organizations may use these reviews to examine other pertinent items which are

beyond the scope of this guide, such as product-related documents or models.

1.2.4.4 PROJECT MANAGEMENT PROCESSES

The project life cycle is managed by executing a series of project management activities

known as project management processes. Every project management process produces one

or more outputs from one or more inputs by using appropriate project management tools

and techniques. The output can be a deliverable or an outcome. Outcomes are an end

result of a process. Project management processes apply globally across industries.

Project management processes are logically linked by the outputs they produce.

Processes may contain overlapping activities that occur throughout the project. The output

of one process generally results in either:

An input to another process, or

A deliverable of the project or project phase.

Figure 1-6 shows an example of how inputs, tools and techniques, and outputs relate to

each other within a process, and with other processes.

52 The number of process iterations and interactions between processes varies based on the

needs of the project. Processes generally fall into one of three categories:

Processes used once or at predefined points in the project. The processes

Develop Project Charter and Close Project or Phase are examples.

Processes that are performed periodically as needed. The process Acquire

Resources is performed as resources are needed. The process Conduct

Procurements is performed prior to needing the procured item.

Processes that are performed continuously throughout the project. The

process Define Activities may occur throughout the project life cycle, especially

if the project uses rolling wave planning or an adaptive development approach.

Many of the monitoring and control processes are ongoing from the start of the

project, until it is closed out.

Project management is accomplished through the appropriate application and

integration of logically grouped project management processes. While there are different

ways of grouping processes, the PMBOK® Guide groups processes into five categories called

Process Groups.

1.2.4.7 PROJECT MANAGEMENT DATA AND INFORMATION

Throughout the life cycle of a project, a significant amount of data is collected, analyzed,

and transformed. Project data are collected as a result of various processes and are shared

within the project team. The collected data are analyzed in context, aggregated, and transformed to become project information during various processes. Information is

communicated verbally or stored and distributed in various formats as reports. See Section

4.3 for more detail on this topic.

Project data are regularly collected and analyzed throughout the project life cycle. The

following definitions identify key terminology regarding project data and information:

Work performance data. The raw observations and measurements identified

during activities performed to carry out the project work. Examples include

reported percent of work physically completed, quality and technical

performance measures, start and finish dates of schedule activities, number of

change requests, number of defects, actual costs, actual durations, etc. Project

data are usually recorded in a Project Management Information System (PMIS)

(see Section 4.3.2.2) and in project documents.

Work performance information. The performance data collected from various

controlling processes, analyzed in context and integrated based on relationships

across areas. Examples of performance information are status of deliverables,

implementation status for change requests, and forecast estimates to complete.

Work performance reports. The physical or electronic representation of work

performance information compiled in project documents, which is intended to

generate decisions or raise issues, actions, or awareness. Examples include status

reports, memos, justifications, information notes, electronic dashboards,

recommendations, and updates.

Figure 1-7 shows the flow of project information across the various processes used in

managing the project.

56 1.2.5 TAILORING

Usually, project managers apply a project management methodology to their work. A

methodology is a system of practices, techniques, procedures, and rules used by those who

work in a discipline. This definition makes it clear that this guide itself is not a

methodology.

This guide and The Standard for Project Management [1] are recommended references

for tailoring, because these standard documents identify the subset of the project

management body of knowledge that is generally recognized as good practice. “Good

practice” does not mean that the knowledge described should always be applied uniformly

to all projects. Specific methodology recommendations are outside the scope of this guide.

Project management methodologies may be:

Developed by experts within the organization,

Purchased from vendors,

57 Obtained from professional associations, or

Acquired from government agencies.

The appropriate project management processes, inputs, tools, techniques, outputs, and

life cycle phases should be selected to manage a project. This selection activity is known as

tailoring project management to the project. The project manager collaborates with the

project team, sponsor, organizational management, or some combination thereof, in the

tailoring. In some cases, the organization may require specific project management

methodologies be used.

Tailoring is necessary because each project is unique; not every process, tool, technique,

input, or output identified in the PMBOK® Guide is required on every project. Tailoring

should address the competing constraints of scope, schedule, cost, resources, quality, and

risk. The importance of each constraint is different for each project, and the project

manager tailors the approach for managing these constraints based on the project

environment, organizational culture, stakeholder needs, and other variables.

In tailoring project management, the project manager should also consider the varying

levels of governance that may be required and within which the project will operate, as well

as considering the culture of the organization. In addition, consideration of whether the

customer of the project is internal or external to the organization may affect project

management tailoring decisions.

Sound project management methodologies take into account the unique nature of

projects and allow tailoring, to some extent, by the project manager. However, the tailoring

that is included in the methodology may still require additional tailoring for a given

project.

1.2.6 PROJECT MANAGEMENT BUSINESS DOCUMENTS

The project manager needs to ensure that the project management approach captures

the intent of business documents. These documents are defined in Table 1-5. These two

documents are interdependent and iteratively developed and maintained throughout the

life cycle of the project.

Table 1-5. Project Business Documents

Project Business Documents Definition

Project business case A documented economic feasibility study used to establish the

validity of the benefits of a selected component lacking sufficient

definition and that is used as a basis for the authorization of

further project management activities.

Project benefits management plan The documented explanation defining the processes for creating,

maximizing, and sustaining the benefits provided by a project.

58 The project sponsor is generally accountable for the development and maintenance of

the project business case document. The project manager is responsible for providing

recommendations and oversight to keep the project business case, project management

plan, project charter, and project benefits management plan success measures in alignment

with one another and with the goals and objectives of the organization.

Project managers should appropriately tailor the noted project management documents

for their projects. In some organizations, the business case and benefits management plan

are maintained at the program level. Project managers should work with the appropriate

program managers to ensure the project management documents are aligned with the

program documents. Figure 1-8 illustrates the interrelationship of these critical project

management business documents and the needs assessment. Figure 1-8 shows an

approximation of the life cycle of these various documents against the project life cycle.

1.2.6.1 PROJECT BUSINESS CASE

The project business case is a documented economic feasibility study used to establish

the validity of the benefits of a selected component lacking sufficient definition and that is

used as a basis for the authorization of further project management activities. The business

case lists the objectives and reasons for project initiation. It helps measure the project

success at the end of the project against the project objectives. The business case is a project

59 business document that is used throughout the project life cycle. The business case may be

used before the project initiation and may result in a go/no-go decision for the project.

A needs assessment often precedes the business case. The needs assessment involves

understanding business goals and objectives, issues, and opportunities and recommending

proposals to address them. The results of the needs assessment may be summarized in the

business case document.

The process of defining the business need, analyzing the situation, making

recommendations, and defining evaluation criteria is applicable to any organization's

projects. A business case may include but is not limited to documenting the following:

Business needs:

Determination of what is prompting the need for action;

Situational statement documenting the business problem or opportunity to

be addressed including the value to be delivered to the organization;

Identification of stakeholders affected; and

Identification of the scope.

Analysis of the situation:

Identification of organizational strategies, goals, and objectives;

Identification of root cause(s) of the problem or main contributors of an

opportunity;

Gap analysis of capabilities needed for the project versus existing capabilities

of the organization;

Identification of known risks;

Identification of critical success factors;

Identification of decision criteria by which the various courses of action may

be assessed;

Examples of criteria categories used for analysis of a situation are:

Required. This is a criterion that is “required” to be fulfilled to address

the problem or opportunity.

Desired. This is a criterion that is “desired” to be fulfilled to address the

problem or opportunity.

Optional. This is a criterion that is not essential. Fulfillment of this

criterion may become a differentiator between alternative courses of

action.

Identification of a set of options to be considered for addressing the business

60 problem or opportunity. Options are alternative courses of action that may be

taken by the organization. Options may also be described as business

scenarios. For example, a business case could present the following three

options:

Do nothing. This is also referred to as the “business as usual” option.

Selection of this option results in the project not being authorized.

Do the minimum work possible to address the problem or opportunity. The

minimum may be established by identifying the set of documented

criteria that are key in addressing the problem or opportunity.

Do more than the minimum work possible to address the problem or

opportunity. This option meets the minimum set of criteria and some or

all of the other documented criteria. There may be more than one of

these options documented in the business case.

Recommendation:

A statement of the recommended option to pursue in the project;

Items to include in the statement may include but are not limited to:

Analysis results for the potential option;

Constraints, assumptions, risks, and dependencies for the potential

options; and

Success measures (see Section 1.2.6.4).

An implementation approach that may include but is not limited to:

Milestones,

Dependencies, and

Roles and responsibilities.

Evaluation:

Statement describing the plan for measuring benefits the project will deliver.

This should include any ongoing operational aspects of the recommended

option beyond initial implementation.

The business case document provides the basis to measure success and progress

throughout the project life cycle by comparing the results with the objectives and the

identified success criteria. See Business Analysis for Practitioners: A Practice Guide [7].

1.2.6.2 PROJECT BENEFITS MANAGEMENT PLAN

The project benefits management plan is the document that describes how and when the

benefits of the project will be delivered, and describes the mechanisms that should be in

place to measure those benefits. A project benefit is defined as an outcome of actions,

61 behaviors, products, services, or results that provide value to the sponsoring organization as

well as to the project's intended beneficiaries. Development of the benefits management

plan begins early in the project life cycle with the definition of the target benefits to be

realized. The benefits management plan describes key elements of the benefits and may

include but is not limited to documenting the following:

Target benefits (e.g., the expected tangible and intangible value to be gained

by the implementation of the project; financial value is expressed as net present

value);

Strategic alignment (e.g., how well the project benefits align to the business

strategies of the organization);

Timeframe for realizing benefits (e.g., benefits by phase, short-term, long-

term, and ongoing);

Benefits owner (e.g., the accountable person to monitor, record, and report

realized benefits throughout the timeframe established in the plan);

Metrics (e.g., the measures to be used to show benefits realized, direct

measures, and indirect measures);

Assumptions (e.g., factors expected to be in place or to be in evidence); and

Risks (e.g., risks for realization of benefits).

Developing the benefits management plan makes use of the data and information

documented in the business case and needs assessment. For example, the cost-benefit

analyses recorded in the documents illustrate the estimate of costs compared to the value of

the benefits realized by the project. The benefits management plan and the project

management plan include a description of how the business value resulting from the project

becomes part of the organization's ongoing operations, including the metrics to be used.

The metrics provide verification of the business value and validation of the project's

success.

Development and maintenance of the project benefits management plan is an iterative

activity. This document complements the business case, project charter, and project

management plan. The project manager works with the sponsor to ensure that the project

charter, project management plan, and the benefits management plan remain in alignment

throughout the life cycle of the project. See Business Analysis for Practitioners: A Practice

Guide [7], The Standard for Program Management [3], and The Standard for Portfolio

Management [2].

1.2.6.3 PROJECT CHARTER AND PROJECT MANAGEMENT PLAN

The project charter is defined as a document issued by the project sponsor that formally

authorizes the existence of a project and provides the project manager with the authority to

apply organizational resources to project activities.

62 The project management plan is defined as the document that describes how the project

will be executed, monitored, and controlled.

See Section 4 on Project Integration Management for more information on the project

charter and the project management plan.

1.2.6.4 PROJECT SUCCESS MEASURES

One of the most common challenges in project management is determining whether or

not a project is successful.

Traditionally, the project management metrics of time, cost, scope, and quality have

been the most important factors in defining the success of a project. More recently,

practitioners and scholars have determined that project success should also be measured

with consideration toward achievement of the project objectives.

Project stakeholders may have different ideas as to what the successful completion of a

project will look like and which factors are the most important. It is critical to clearly

document the project objectives and to select objectives that are measurable. Three

questions that the key stakeholders and the project manager should answer are:

What does success look like for this project?

How will success be measured?

What factors may impact success?

The answer to these questions should be documented and agreed upon by the key

stakeholders and the project manager.

Project success may include additional criteria linked to the organizational strategy and

to the delivery of business results. These project objectives may include but are not limited

to:

Completing the project benefits management plan;

Meeting the agreed-upon financial measures documented in the business case.

These financial measures may include but are not limited to:

Net present value (NPV),

Return on investment (ROI),

Internal rate of return (IRR),

Payback period (PBP), and

Benefit-cost ratio (BCR).

Meeting business case nonfinancial objectives;

Completing movement of an organization from its current state to the desired

future state;

63 Fulfilling contract terms and conditions;

Meeting organizational strategy, goals, and objectives;

Achieving stakeholder satisfaction;

Acceptable customer/end-user adoption;

Integration of deliverables into the organization's operating environment;

Achieving agreed-upon quality of delivery;

Meeting governance criteria; and

Achieving other agreed-upon success measures or criteria (e.g., process

throughput).

The project team needs to be able to assess the project situation, balance the demands,

and maintain proactive communication with stakeholders in order to deliver a successful

project.

When the business alignment for a project is constant, the chance for project success

greatly increases because the project remains aligned with the strategic direction of the

organization.

It is possible for a project to be successful from a scope/schedule/budget viewpoint, and

to be unsuccessful from a business viewpoint. This can occur when there is a change in the

business needs or the market environment before the project is completed.

64 2

THE ENVIRONMENT IN WHICH PROJECTS

OPERATE

2.1 OVERVIEW

Projects exist and operate in environments that may have an influence on them. These

influences can have a favorable or unfavorable impact on the project. Two major categories

of influences are enterprise environmental factors (EEFs) and organizational process assets

(OPAs).

EEFs originate from the environment outside of the project and often outside of the

enterprise. EEFs may have an impact at the organizational, portfolio, program, or project

level. See Section 2.2 for additional information on EEFs.

OPAs are internal to the organization. These may arise from the organization itself, a

portfolio, a program, another project, or a combination of these. Figure 2-1 shows the

breakdown of project influences into EEFs and OPAs. See Section 2.3 for additional

information on OPAs.

In addition to EEFs and OPAs, organizational systems play a significant role in the life

65 cycle of the project. System factors that impact the power, influence, interests,

competencies, and political capabilities of the people to act within the organizational system

are discussed further in the section on organizational systems (see Section 2.4).

2.2 ENTERPRISE ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS

Enterprise environmental factors (EEFs) refer to conditions, not under the control of the

project team, that influence, constrain, or direct the project. These conditions can be

internal and/or external to the organization. EEFs are considered as inputs to many project

management processes, specifically for most planning processes. These factors may enhance

or constrain project management options. In addition, these factors may have a positive or

negative influence on the outcome.

EEFs vary widely in type or nature. These factors need to be considered if the project is

to be effective. EEFs include but are not limited to the factors described in Sections 2.2.1

and 2.2.2.

2.2.1 EEFS INTERNAL TO THE ORGANIZATION

The following EEFs are internal to the organization:

Organizational culture, structure, and governance. Examples include vision,

mission, values, beliefs, cultural norms, leadership style, hierarchy and

authority relationships, organizational style, ethics, and code of conduct.

Geographic distribution of facilities and resources. Examples include factory

locations, virtual teams, shared systems, and cloud computing.

Infrastructure. Examples include existing facilities, equipment, organizational

telecommunications channels, information technology hardware, availability,

and capacity.

Information technology software. Examples include scheduling software tools,

configuration management systems, web interfaces to other online automated

systems, and work authorization systems.

Resource availability. Examples include contracting and purchasing

constraints, approved providers and subcontractors, and collaboration

agreements.

Employee capability. Examples include existing human resources expertise,

skills, competencies, and specialized knowledge.

2.2.2 EEFS EXTERNAL TO THE ORGANIZATION

66 The following EEFs are external to the organization.

Marketplace conditions. Examples include competitors, market share brand

recognition, and trademarks.

Social and cultural influences and issues. Examples include political climate,

